# 热学笔记 3 能均分与能量 (1)

## 1.3 Equipartition of Energy (能量均分理论)

**Equipartition** **theorem** concerns not just translational kinetic energy but *all* forms of energy for which the formula is a quadratic(二次型) function of a coordinate or a velocity component. 

At temperature $T$, the average energy of any quadratic degree of freedom is $\frac{1}{2}kT$

Then its *total* thermal energy is 

$$
U_{thermal}=N\cdot f\cdot \frac{1}{2}kT
$$

Each such form of energy is called a **degree of freedom(自由度).** 

Here is a table about defree of freedom for different kind of particle.

| Molecular species | Translational motion | Rotation |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Monatomic(单原子) | 3 | 0 |
| Diatomic(双原子) | 3 | 2 |
| Polyatomic(多原子) | 3 | 3 |

Particularly, solid has **six** degrees of freedom(three for kinetic energy and three for potential energy)

However, some of the degrees of freedom may be “**frozen out**” ****at room temperature.

Liquids are more complicated than either gases os solids. We can generally use the formula$\frac{3}{2}kT$.

## 1.4 Heat and Work(热与功)

### 1.4.1 The First law of Thermodynamics(热力学第一定律)

**Heat** is defined as any spontaneous flow of energy from one object to another caused by a difference in temperature between the  objects.

**Work**, in thermodynamics, is defined as any other transfer of energy into or of a system. (You can do work on a system whenever you push on a piston, stir a cup of coffee)

**The first law of thermodynamics:** 

$$
\Delta U=Q+W
$$

The official SI unit of energy is the **joule**, defined as $1$ $kg\cdot m^2/s^2$

Traditionally, heat has been measured in **calories**, where 1cal was defined as the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of a **gram** of water by $1^\circ C$

$$
1cal=4.186^\circ C
$$

### 1.4.2 Processes of heat transfer(热传导过程)

1. **Conduction(热传导)** is the transfer of heat by molecular cantact: Fast-moving moleculesa bump into slow-moving molecules, giving up some of their energy in the process.
2. **Convection(热对流)** is the bulk motion of a gas or liquid, usually driven by the tendency of warmer material to expand and rise in a gravitational field.
3. **Radiation(热辐射)** is the emission of electromagnetic waves, mostly infrared for objects at room temperature but including visible light for hotter objects. 

---