# 热学笔记 1 基本概念 (1)

# Chapter 1 Energy in Thermal Physics

## 1.1 热学概念及热学平衡 Thermal Equilibrium

### 1.1.1 温度的解释

> If you want to measure the temperature of a pot of soup, you stick a thermometer(such as a mercury thermometer) into the soup, wait a while, then look at the reading on the themometer’s scale.
> 

This defination of temperature is what called an **operational definition** ,because it tells you how to measure the quantity.

> **Temperature** is the thing that’s the same for two objects, after they’ve been in contact long enough.
> 

We’ll refer to this as the **theoretical difinition** of temperature.

### 1.1.2 热平衡的概念

1. After two objects have been in contact long enough, we say they are in **thermal equilibium**
2. The time required for a system to come to thermal equilibrium is called the **relaxation time(弛豫时间)** 

The blending is not necessary for thermal equilibrium, but constitutes a second type of equilibrium:

1. **Diffusive equilibrium**—in which the molecules of each substance are free to move around but no longer have any tendency to move one way or another.
2. **Mechanical equilibrium** —when large-scale motions can take place but no longer do.

### 1.1.3 温度的相关概念

1. Let we restate the theoretical definition of temperature:
    
    **Temperature** is a measure of tendency of an object to spontaneously(自然地) give up energy to its surroundings. When two objects are in thermal contact, the one that tends to spontaneously *lose* energy is at the *higher* temperature.
    
2. If we hold the volume of the gas fixed(定体),  then its *pressure* will approach zero as the temperature approaches $-273^\circ C$. This special temperature is called **absolute zero(绝对零度)**, and define the zero-point of the **absolute temperature** **scale.**
    
    So the SI unit of absolute temperature is called **kelvin**.
    

### 1.1.4 描述状态的物理量

1. **Coefficient of isobaric expansion(等压碰撞系数)**

$$
\alpha=\frac{1}{V}\left( \frac{\partial V}{\partial T}\right)_p
$$

1. **Isothermal compression coefficient  (等温压缩系数)**
    
    $$
    \kappa_T=-\frac{1}{V}\left(\frac{\partial V}{\partial p}\right)_T
    $$
    
2. **Isochoric pressure coefficient(等体压强系数)**
    
    $$
    \beta=\frac{1}{p}\left(\frac{\partial p}{\partial T}\right)_V
    $$
    

三者有关系：

$$
\alpha=\beta \kappa_T p
$$

---